---
layout: post
title: "Queer_art_from_Korea(Seoul)_:_a_list_of_my_own__2017"
date: 2018-01-07 16:45:00 +0900
comments: true 
categories: [writings] 
---
*이 글은
에서도 확인할 수 있습니다. 한글 버전은 http://blog.naver.com/hotleve/221142151396 여기로. 

 
Queer art from Korea(Seoul) : a list of my own, 2017.
 
Yeonsook LEE / 리타Rita; Host of the podcast channel <퀴어방송(Queercast)>. Writes and talks about queer/feminism/art.
(Translation : Mire LEE)
 
With an apparent increase in population defining themselves as ’queer’, to spot the ‘queer art’ here in Seoul is not as difficult as it was in the past. One can say an artwork from an artist who defines oneself as ‘queer’ may all be called as queer art; this type of categorization is old but still offers an effective criterion. However, the ’queer’ has never ceased its effort on trying to find the gauge that is more diverse, more political; queerness as an attitude that embraces failure as a tool for a better present(halberstam),
or anti-social and negative way of being for subversion of heteronormativity (bersani), or considering queerness as an abstract utopia that has not yet arrived and trying to redeem it. (munos). Of course, it is not necessary to internalize all these discourses. People can have their own approach on what ‘queerness’ is.
I tend to consider all the works that are disturbing and difficult to deal with as ‘queer art’. The notorious cross-dresser twitter account ‘창녀CD민망복장막장극초개변태좆씹돼지년(translated as something like; hookerCDshamegutspervertcockcuntcowbitch)’ who’s account now is locked, is a good example. His various hand-made objects, tacky and frivolous, all with the same purpose to decorate his anus are truly queer. With the performance’s definite quality of self-materialization and the masochistic pleasure that comes along with the process, his work is more than a mere exhibitionism with the maker’s excessively attentive artisan spirit.

 
Copyright 2017. 창녀CD민망복장막장극초개변태좆씹돼지년 All rights reserved.
 
 
Other video works from Kwon Yongman(계정주 of ‘시네마지옥(cinemahell)’ are other examples. His works such as <몬도 코리아Mondo Corea>, <갓건배에 대한 모든 것All about Godgunbae> are absurdly funny, but still too disturbing to just laugh about as they expose the ugly side of contemporary Korean-ness in such intimate and close distance. The unnecessarily long running time of <갓건배에 대한 모든 것All about Godgunbae> then becomes the matter of endurability. All these elements eventually elevate to one question; why would somebody produce a work like this anyway? It doesn’t seem that it is meant to be productive nor helpful. This type of fanatically apolitical and pessimistic aesthetics is what characterizes Kwon’s work.[1]
 

Copyright 2017. 권용만 All rights reserved.
 
I would also like to introduce a drag-show that I have recently experienced. The team <여성, 괴물The monstrous-feminine>[2](its name apparently coined after Barbara Kruger) presented its 4th event with five performers in. All the other performances were good as well, although the part of drag-king(아장맨Aajangman) was particularly striking as the appearance of drag-king is still quite rare in Korea. Seoul does have drag communities that are active, such as  “서울드랙Seouldrag”[3] which openly talks about hate problems towards female and transgender, as well as the beauty of drag.
 
 
Copyright 2017. 아장맨 All rights reserved.
 
As this much can all be categorized as ’may or may not queer art’ type of works on my list. Then one may ask; is there a ‘queer art’ in Seoul, that is intentionally and obviously as such? Of course, there is. The exhibition <리드마이립스Read My Lips>[4], revolving around the concept of drag in queer-gender-politics, is an amalgam of different works that are weird and queer. The underlying ambition of the show is to introduce the concept of queer in the broader context. As the curation intended, the show, which is a hybrid of different media-painting, installation, performance, live-broadcast(공개방송)-is confusing and somewhat ambiguous. One of the artists ‘이반지하(iibanjiha)’ wore hand-made costumes with obvious sexual symbols and sang her famous original songs ‘나는 이반 그녀는 일반(I am Eban She is Ilban[5])’, ‘레즈바에 온 작은 헤테로(Lil hetero in a lesbian bar)’, ‘오염(Contamination)’.

 
Copyright 2017. 김영란, 이반지하 All rights reserved.
 
If one senses a desperate sentiment in her repetitive chorus, that is probably because we all eventually need to go home when the song finishes. To not to break the promise of this temporality, we will endlessly be wanting to collect, encounter and to be around the ’queerness’.
 
 
[1] <2017 MONDO COREA Trailer> https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UWAP7HNZfpg <갓건배에 대한 모든 것 All About Godgunbae>
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8URM7ZthvGU
 
[2] <여성,괴물> https://twitter.com/monstrousfem
[3] <서울드랙> https://twitter.com/dragnerd_seoul
[4] <리드마이립스> https://www.facebook.com/events/629055017302493/
[5] ‘이반Eban’ means homo, ‘일반Ilban’ means hetero in korea.




 
